---
title: "jQuery"

categories: 
- Web Development

tags:
- jQuery
  
toc: true
toc_sticky: true
---

> ✒ Reference: [jQuery tutorial from W3 schools](https://www.w3schools.com/jquERy/default.asp)

## What is jQuery?

jQuery is a JavaScript library that simplifies the usage of JavaScript. It contains features like:

- HTML/DOM manipulation
- CSS manipulation
- HTML event methods
- Effects and animations
- AJAX
- Utilities

## Using jQuery

To use jQuery, you can (1) download it from [jQuery.com](https://jquery.com/download/), place the file in the same directory as the pages where you want to use it, and reference it with a `<script>` tag inside the `<head>` section:

```jsx
<head>
<script src="jquery-3.5.1.min.js"></script>
</head>
```

or (2) include it from a CDN (Content Delivery Network). Using the hosted jQuery from Google CDN leads to faster loading time, since

- (a) jQuery from Google is already downloaded when visiting another site and loaded from cache when visiting your site
- and (b) most CDNs serve the requested file from the server closest to the user.

jQuery functions can be placed in a separate file, then referred to as a script source.

```jsx
// Google CDN
<head>
<script src="https://ajax.googleapis.com/ajax/libs/jquery/3.5.1/jquery.min.js"></script>
<script src="my_jquery_functions.js"></script>
</head>
```

## jQuery Syntax

jQuery uses CSS syntax to **select** HTML elements and perform some **action** on the element(s).
The basic syntax is: **`$(selector).action()`**

- A `$` sign to define/access jQuery
- A `(selector)` to "query (or find)" HTML elements
- A jQuery `action()` to be performed on the element(s)

### The Document Ready Event

Running jQuery methods before the document is fully loaded may cause problems like accessing components that are not created or loaded yet. To prevent this from happening, all jQuery methods are inside a document ready event.

```jsx
$(document).ready(function(){
// jQuery methods go here...
});

$(function(){
// A shorter version
});
```

### Selectors

jQuery selectors are used to "find" and "select" HTML elements based on their name, id, classes, types, attributes, values of attributes, and much more. It is based on the existing CSS Selectors, and also has some own custom selectors.

- The element selector: `$("p")`

```jsx
// When a user clicks on a button, all <p> elements will be hidden:
$(document).ready(function(){
  $("button").click(function(){
    $("p").hide();
  });
});
```

- The #id selector: `$("#test")`

```jsx
// When a user clicks on a button, the element with id="test" will be hidden:
$(document).ready(function(){
  $("button").click(function(){
    $("#test").hide();
  });
});
```

- The .class selector: `$(".test")`

```jsx
// When a user clicks on a button, the elements with class="test" will be hidden:
$(document).ready(function(){
  $("button").click(function(){
    $(".test").hide();
  });
});
```

The complete reference of all the jQuery selectors is available in [jQuery documentation](https://api.jquery.com/) or [w3schools reference documentation](https://www.w3schools.com/jquERy/jquery_ref_overview.asp).

### Events

All the different visitor's actions that a web page can respond to are called events. The term "fires/fired" is often used. (i.e. "The keypress event is fired, the moment you press a key.)

Most DOM events have an equivalent jQuery method. You must pass a function to the event to define what should happen when the event is fired.

Methods attach the given event handler function to an HTML event, and execute the function according to user's **"actions"**.  

Method | When is the event handler function executed? |
------- | -------|
`click()` | When the user *clicks* on the HTML event |
`dblclick()` | When the user *double-clicks* on the HTML element |
`mouseenter()` | When the mouse pointer *enters* the HTML element |
`mouseleave()` | When the mouse pointer *leaves* the HTML element |
`mousedown()` | When the *left, middle or right mouse button is pressed down*, while the mouse is over the HTML element |
`mouseup()` | When the *left, middle or right mouse button is released*, while the mouse is over the HTML element |
`hover()` | Combination of the `mouseenter()` and `mouseleave()`*. |
`focus()` | When the form field gets focus |
`blur()` | When the form field loses foucs |

### Events - Examples

- `hover()` takes two functions, where the first function is executed at `mouseenter()` and the second is executed at `mouseleave()`.

```jsx
 $("#p1").hover(function(){
  alert("You entered p1!");
},
function(){
  alert("Bye! You now leave p1!");
});
```

- `focus()` and `blur()` handles form fields.

```jsx
$("input").focus(function(){
  $(this).css("background-color", "#cccccc");
});

$("input").blur(function(){
  $(this).css("background-color", "#ffffff");
});
```

- `on()` method attaches one or more event handlers for the selected elements.

```jsx
// Attach multiple event hanlders to a <p> element:
$("p").on({
  mouseenter: function(){
    $(this).css("background-color", "lightgray");
  },
  mouseleave: function(){
    $(this).css("background-color", "lightblue");
  },
  click: function(){
    $(this).css("background-color", "yellow");
  }
});
```
